## Speech-to-text for Yiddish: Expanding Accessibility, Preservation, and Learning for Yiddish-speaking Communities
Evan Price, Fall 2024


### Abstract

Despite its historical significance and significant support from the academy, Yiddish remains a low resource language, with limited technological support. This project aims to develop a speech-to-text (STT) system for Yiddish to enhance accessibility, provide greater learning support, and preserve the linguistic heritage of secular Yiddish-speaking communities. This paper outlines the design and implementation of an STT tool that transcribes Yiddish speech into standard YIVO orthography, with support for transcription and live captioning. This paper addresses key challenges, including data scarcity, community engagement, and scalability, along with technical debt incurred by this project and solutions to address it. By collaborating with cultural organizations and engaging community stakeholders, this initiative not only improves the usability of digital Yiddish content but also fosters language learning and the growth of the Yiddish-speaking community. This project demonstrates the potential of technology and open-source projects in bridging accessibility gaps, advancing pedagogy, and empowering marginalized language communities. 

### Introduction

Yiddish is the spoken language of Ashkenazi Jews, or Jews from Eastern Europe. Yiddish originated around 1000 C.E., when Jewish communities settled in the middle Rhine basin. Yiddish is a fusion language that combined spoken medieval German; loshn kosesh (holy language) in Yiddish, or Hebrew and Aramiac, the languages of Jewish liturgy and scripture; with Romance languages spoken by Jews prior to moving to the middle Rhine basin. As Jews migrated throughout Eastern Europe, Yiddish picked up Slavic elements as well. Although Yiddish is a Germanic language, it is written in the Hebrew alphabet because that is the language literate Jews could read and write in prior to modernity, as the language of Jewish liturgy and scriptures. Towards the end of the 19th and the start of the 20th century, Yiddish experienced a cultural renaissance that included the creation of literature, poetry, theater, art and more. During this time period, the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research created a standardized Yiddish spelling and grammar system, which is referred to as standard YIVO Orthography. While there are several dialects of Yiddish, standard YIVO Orthography and pronunciation is what is taught in Universities today.

While Yiddish is stigmatized as a dead language, there are an estimated 500-600,000 Yiddish speakers today (Konczal). Although this is significantly less than the peak recorded 11-13 million Yiddish speakers estimated to have been alive right before the start of World War II Holocaust, scholars believe Yiddish is no longer declining and may be on the rise (Konczal). Yiddish is spoken and used globally, with Yiddish theater companies in New York City, Warsaw, Tel Aviv, and Montreal, and the Hasidic Yiddish speaking community in Boro Park even has Yiddish ATMs, board games, businesses with signage in Yiddish, and street signs in Yiddish. While the vast majority of Yiddish speakers are Hasidic (ultra-Orthodox), there are secular Yiddish speakers, whose needs this project attempts to address. Secular Yiddish culture consists of both heritage speakers and Yiddishists, ideological Yiddish speakers who promote the preservation and creation of new culture in Yiddish.Yiddish is taught at dozens of universities. For example, at the University of Illinois students can take Yiddish through CourseShare at the University of Michigan Ann-Arbor over zoom. In addition, there are intensive Yiddish summer programs offered in NYC, Western Mass, Berlin, and Israel. While secular Yiddishist culture is dominated by academia, it is not entirely academic. Week-long Yiddish retreats in North America and Australia each summer, and Yiddish lectures, concerts, and events are regularly offered online, in addition to festivals like Yiddish New York, which happens in New York City each December. 

The secular Yiddishist community faces several unique challenges that must be addressed. Secular Yiddish speaking communities outside of New York City and Western Massachusetts, USA are small and disparate, and therefore required to host most events online, rather than in person, limiting the chance to speak in Yiddish. In addition, online events present accessibility issues for people with hearing issues and neurodivergent individuals with sensory processing disorders. While there is a significant amount of auditory Yiddish content available online in the form of podcasts, films, YouTube videos, and interview series, much of it is not captioned, and when it is, it is frequently captioned in English. This is a massive lost learning opportunity for students, who would benefit from being able to listen to Yiddish and read captions at the same time. A speech-to-text (STT) tool would benefit secular Yiddish-speaking communities by allowing them to caption online events like lectures, classes, and webinars; make archival material and interview series accessible for learning and cultural engagement; and improve accessibility for disabled members of the community.

### Project Overview

This project aims to create a speech-to-text (STT) tool with transcription and live-captioning abilities. It would be developed to support output in standard YIVO orthography. This paper will propose a three-year timeline for building this tool, along with plans for community outreach and developing an engaged community of contributors. It will address challenges unique to this project such as limited datasets, small community size, along with technical debt incurred and solutions for minimizing technical debt. 

#### Year One: Foundations    

In the first year, the focus would be on initial research, data collection and annotation, and model selection and testing. As a project management strategy, we would use open-source softwares to develop the initial foundation of this tool in order to save valuable time and money. This project would use Kaldi, a freely available, open-source software speech recognition toolkit intended for use in building Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) systems, for phoneme extraction and initial ASR development. During this year, the project would work to adapt Kaldi’s configurations to support Yiddish phonemes and linguistic nuance and integrate Kaldi’s outputs into a preprocessing pipeline to prepare clean data for model training. The initial dataset would be taken and augmented from the REYD: Reading Electronic Yiddish Documents data-set, which is an open-source project created to support text-to-speech (TTS) for Yiddish, developed by Jacob J. Webber, Samuel Lo, and Isaac L. Bleaman. This would serve as the foundation for augmenting and creating a more diverse dataset. For designing the speech-to-text system, we would also use Wav2Vec 2.0, an open source tool for designing ASR systems and leverage its pre-trained capabilities to create an ASR model for Yiddish, and then fine-tune the model using the prepared dataset to minimize initial training overhead. 

During this first year, much of our time would be spent preparing the dataset. The audio samples would come from the public REYD dataset, archives, and community contributions, which I will touch on later. After processing raw data for consistency (e.g., normalizing audio quality, standardizing text transcription formats), we would collaborate with Yiddish language experts to standardize YIVO orthography annotations and dialect tags. After creating the initial dataset, the next step would be to identify and document dataset gaps, including missing phonemes and dialectal variations.We would also do some initial testing, and evaluate Kaldi’s phoneme extraction performance on the initial dataset, and conduct initial tests to identify transcription biases and areas needing improvement. We would also design our pipeline to streamline preprocessing, model training, and evaluation, using version control to track iterations and mitigate technical debt. 

A significant focus of this period would be on developing good documentation practices to minimize technical debt incurred. In the initial stages, technical debt would most likely be incurred from constraints from the limited dataset meaning limited diversity in phoneme coverage and dialect representation, and biases that may emerge from over-reliance on a single dataset in the early stages. Significant cost will be incurred by the effort required to adapt the tools we use for Yiddish-specific linguistic features, including custom phoneme sets, and the augmentation needed to align existing data with project requirements.

#### Year 2: Refinement

In Year Two, we would expand our initial datasets, refine the accuracy of the model, and begin to test our tool at live-events and on existing recordings. Contributions from community members would enable us to add new audio recordings to the dataset that include missing or underrepresented phonemes, and augment the dataset with cleaned and standardized audio-text pairs.. We would also categorize and annotate dialectical variations to improve coverage across diverse Yiddish speakers and improve transcription for archival audio. This would enable us to refine the accuracy of the transcription, and adjust the model to address inconsistencies in handling different dialects and improve transcription accuracy for less-represented phonemes and dialects. Outputs would be evaluated against linguistic benchmarks and using the help of community feedback to identify and resolve persistent errors. During Year Two, we would begin to pilot our captioning system for live online events, engaging community members to provide feedback on issues with the system. We would also test the tool on archival materials, such as historical recordings, to assess performance on older, noisier audio. 

The technical debt incurred and maintained during this period would come from the use of open source software, scaling challenges, and pipeline integration.The adaptation of Kaldi to Yiddish phonemes introduces ongoing maintenance needs for configuration updates and error resolution. Inconsistent outputs from the prototype require additional normalization processes, increasing complexity in the pipeline. Additionally, dataset growth introduces challenges in storage, processing power, and training time for models and increased user demand stresses system resources, necessitating infrastructure upgrades. Lastly, the integration of multiple open-source tools into the pipeline requires continuous refinements and thorough documentation to maintain consistency and reliability.

#### Year Three: Deployment

During Year Three, we would deploy our system and focus on establishing feedback loops in order to improve functionality. Our fully functional STT system would allow users to transcribe both real-time audio, and noisy, archival audio. This tool would be made accessible through a user-friendly interface, ensuring compatibility with various devices and platforms, such as Zoom and YouTube. The transcription system supports both live and recorded audio, offering transcription in standard YIVO orthography. During this year, continuous updates would be applied to address bugs and enhance transcription quality. We would work to establish feedback loops, gathering information from users through detailed surveys, error reports, and system usage analytics so we could make iterative improvements based on user feedback.

Managing technical debt during this phase might look like migrating to newer versions of core tools in our pipeline, potentially making us retrain models or reconfigure the system. Frequent updates to external libraries and frameworks would introduce ongoing maintenance burdens. The system may also face challenges in scaling to accommodate larger datasets. Technical debt may also have been incurred from early-stage preprocessing errors, which propagated into later stages, necessitating manual review and correction. These retrospective fixes increase labor and time costs, contributing to accumulated technical debt. The strategy we would implement to avoid accumulating more technical debt than necessary is creating a culture that rewards documentation and continuous maintenance of tools used. 

#### Looking to the Future

As this project matures, we would want to revisit our initial roadmaps to plan how we could further develop the project and deploy it more broadly, along with how to improve accessibility and scalability. We would also want to think about expanding the user base beyond initial focus communities. Academic research was not addressed in the scope of this project, but there is significant potential for collaboration with academic institutions and researchers in the field of Yiddish studies, linguistics, LLM, and more. Additionally, long term, this project would want to address potential long-term debt sources like API migrations and scaling to additional dialects.

### Community Engagement

A key component of this project would be ensuring community engagement and building a strong community from the start. In our first year, we would begin to define our target groups: cultural and archival institutions, and academics, such as historians, linguists, and technology enthusiasts. In our first six months, we would like to launch an awareness campaign and get over 30 community members who expressed interest in involvement. One challenge this particular project might face is that this is a small community, and most academics are in the humanities. 

At the second half of year one and the start of year two, we would turn our initial community outreach into engagement, attempting to get interested community members to assist with data collection. By hosting virtual and in-person informational sessions to explain project goals and methods, and sharing initial demos to build excitement and encourage input, hopefully we would inspire community members to submit volunteer recordings and audio samples, using guided scripts to expand our dataset. We would also annotate any contributions and add metadata during this time period. A goal would be to receive 10+ hours of community-contributed audio samples and have the initial transcripted data set prepared six months into Year Two. 

Afterwards, we would move towards feedback collection, and test the system with early adopters, encouraging feedback on transcription accuracy and UI usability. Feedback would come from in person events and interviews with early adopters, as well as community forums, surveys, and bug reporting through github or other issue trackers. A milestone for this phase might be receiving feedback from 15+ community members or identifying common transcription and UI issues. This early feedback would enable us to move into the iteration and refinement stage in Year Three, once our model is deployed and usable. 

During Year Three, the focus would shift to iteration—refining STT outputs, adjusting the UI for accessibility and ease of use, solving any major bugs—based on feedback from community members. Another round of testing with community members would probably occur during this stage. We would also want to continue to collect volunteer and community data. Goals for this stage might include resolving major transcription and usability issues, and expanding dataset contributions by 50% within Year Three.

Long term, our goal would be to create sustainable partnerships with community stakeholders, both on institutional and individual levels. This might look like developing partnerships with Yiddish cultural organizations like the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research and the Yiddish Book Center, as well as hosting regular webinars, lectures, and community workshops. Establishing a contributor reward system with acknowledgement for contributions and early access to updates would be crucial for long-term sustainability, as well as official partnerships with institutions that have sway and power.

### Conclusion      

This tool, which would allow live-captioning for events and transcription of archival audio along with other Yiddish materials, would provide a lot of benefits to the Yiddish speaking community. It would benefit language learners by allowing for dual-modality input (listening and reading at the same time), which fills a massive gap in Yiddish curricula. It also addresses gaps in accessibility for the Yiddishist community by allowing more community members with disabilities or who live far from other Yiddish speakers to engage with Yiddish at a higher level. By using YIVO orthography, this project makes Yiddish more accessible to those in the secular and academic Yiddish-speaking communities.

This project relies on community engagement, both at an institutional and interpersonal level, which is why it is well-suited to an open-source project. Community engagement allows for this project to overcome challenges like data scarcity and get a better range of feedback from stakeholders. Partnerships with cultural and archival organizations would also enable this project to get more data via historical audio and expand its user base because of their influence within the community. The iterative process designed in this paper would strengthen the tools usability, and foster a sense of community, and collective ownership among stakeholders. It would also enable the community to feel like they are actively participating in the revitalization of the Yiddish language. This project holds relevance outside of the Yiddish speaking community, and could be a model for how low-resource language communities can support themselves through the use of technology. The pipeline and model for community engagement designed in this paper is transferable to other languages. By leveraging existing open-source tools, this project is a model for how low-resource language communities can create sustainable solutions to fill technological gaps. 

This project has lots of potential for long-term sustainability and development. After the initial tool is released, the project would still need to expand datasets with new dialects and phonemes, improve the UI/UX based on community feedback, and establish further partnerships. Long term, one thing that I could have discussed more is applications in academic research and linguistic studies and plans for creating partnerships with global institutions for further dissemination. This project would significantly improve Yiddish accessibility and language learning, and serves a model for how open-source tools can be used to help low-resource language communities. Open source technologies and models of project management can be applied for preserving linguistic diversity, supporting language revitalization projects, and empowering marginalized communities more broadly. 

### References     

Konczal, Eddie F. n.d. “Yiddish FAQs.” Jewish Studies at Rutgers - Bildner Center and Dept. of 
Jewish Studies. https://jewishstudies.rutgers.edu/component/content/article/159-yiddish-faqs?Itemid=100120&catid=102.

“REYD: Reading Electronic Yiddish Documents.” n.d. GitHub. https://github.com/REYD-TTS.
